Update interpolated string proposal with feedback (#4588)
dotnet/csharplang: proposals/improved-interpolated-strings.md

We introduce a new builder pattern that can represent an interpolated string passed as an argument to a method. The simple English of the pattern is as follows:

When an _interpolated\_string\_expression_ is passed as an argument to a method, we look at the type of the parameter. If the parameter type has a static method
`Create` that can invoked with 2 int parameters, `baseLength` and `formatHoleCount`, optionally takes a parameter the receiver is convertible to,

> and has an out parameter of the type of original method's parameter and that type has instance `TryFormatX` methods can be invoked for every part of the interpolated

Reviewer: >  If the parameter type has a static method `Create` that can invoked with 2 int parameters

This will impact the static virtual interfaces proposal as type parameters will become eligable in certain cases to be interpolated builders. Can we add a tracking issue in the proposal that we need to handle this at some point in the future.

Don't want to design it, just want to make sure we are tracking that these features overlap in this space.

string, then we lower the interpolation using that, instead of into a traditional call to `string.Format(formatStr, args)`. A more concrete example is helpful for
picturing this:

```cs
// The builder that will actually "build" the interpolated string"
public ref struct TraceLoggerParamsBuilder
{

>     public static bool Create(int baseLength, int formatHoleCount, Logger logger, out TraceLoggerParamsBuilder builder)

Reviewer: One of the suggestions from the previous PR was to make these methods return the builder type and have the `bool` as the `out` parameter. Is there a reason we didn't change to use that form? 

The current form is less efficient performance wise (returning complex types is faster than initializing them by `ref / out`) and also has implications with `ref struct` life time rules. A non-trivial amount of our interpolated builders are going to be `ref struct` and once they are passed as  `ref / out` then we need to do a lot of due dilligence around the life time rules here. 

The details here are mundane but important and the `ref` field proposal probably does the best job of explaining them 

https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/low-level-struct-improvements.md#provide-parameter-does-not-escape-annotations

In short though we would need to make guarantees about the lifetimes of the temporaries that we pass as the `out` here. No such guarantees need to be done if we simple return them here.

Author: Discussed this offline. While LDM hasn't approved that change currently, I'll go ahead and make the change, and leave an open question to confirm it.

A type is said to be an _applicable\_interpolated\_string\_builder\_type_ if, given an _interpolated\_string\_literal_ `S`, the following is true:

* Overload resolution with an identifier of `TryFormatBaseString` and a parameter type of `string` succeeds, and contains a single instance method that returns a `bool`.
* For every _regular\_balanced\_text_ component of `S` (`Si`) without an _interpolation\_format_ component or _constant\_expression_ (alignment) component, overload resolution
with an identifier of `TryFormatInterpolationHole` and parameter of the type of `Si` and name  succeeds, and contains a single instance method that returns a `bool`.
* For every _regular\_balanced\_text_ component of `S` (`Si`) with an _interpolation\_format_ component and no _constant\_expression_ (alignment) component, overload resolution
with an identifier of `TryFormatInterpolationHole` and parameter types of `Si` and `string`(in that order) succeeds, and contains a single instance method that returns a `bool`.
* For every _regular\_balanced\_text_ component of `S` (`Si`) with a _constant\_expression_ (alignment) component and no _interpolation\_format_ component, overload resolution

> with an identifier of `TryFormatInterpolationHole and parameter types of `Si` and `int` (in that order) succeeds, and contains a single instance method that returns a `bool`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with an identifier of `TryFormatInterpolationHole` and parameter types of `Si` and `int` (in that order) succeeds, and contains a single instance method that returns a `bool`.
```

* For every _regular\_balanced\_text_ component of `S` (`Si`) with an _interpolation\_format_ component and a _constant\_expression_ (alignment) component, overload resolution
with an identifier of `TryFormatInterpolationHole` and parameter types of `Si`, `int`, and `string` (in that order) succeeds, and contains a single instance method that returns a `bool`.

> The rest of this proposal will use `TryFormatX` to refer to either of `TryFormatBaseString` or `TryFormatInterpolationHoles` in cases when both are applicable.

Reviewer 2: I found this confusing that you used `TryFormatX` above in the 'simple english' section, but didn't define it until now. I would also suggest using `TryFormat...` as (IMO) its clearer what you mean, and isn't a valid identifier.

Note that these rules do not permit extension methods for the `TryFormatX` calls. We could consider enabling that if we choose, but this is analogous to the enumerator
pattern, where we allow `GetEnumerator` to be an extension method, but not `Current` or `MoveNext()`.

> These rules _do_ permit default parameters for the `TryFormatX` calls, which will work with things like `CallerLineNumber` or `CallerArgumentExpression` (when supported by

Reviewer 3: I understand this for TryFormatInterpolationHole.  What does it mean to support CallerArgumentExpression with TryFormatBaseString?

Author: That's what I would expect. Not that I expect anyone to _do_ that, but we would support it.

the language).

> We have separate overload lookup rules for base elements vs interpolation holes because some builders will want to be able to understand the difference between the components

Reviewer 2: I totally get the use case for this, but it seems complicated, especially for simpler cases that don't care. Could we alternatively have a single method that takes a `struct` with all the info in it?

```csharp
struct InteroplatedStringBuilderHoleInfo
{
    string content;
    bool isBaseString;
    string? interpolationFormat;
    int? alignment;
}
```

That way, the given builder can just look at whatever info is useful to it, we get a place to add extra info (like the caller expression if we go that route) and reduces duplication in the builder when not needed?

Reviewer 3: That will make every call more expensive, in order to set up the struct just to be able to pass in the relevant info.  That struct would also need to be either emitted for every different T or be generic on T, and the latter would prevent ref structs (e.g. spans) from being used in holes, which is important to be able to support.

that were interpolated and the components that were part of the base string.

**Open Question**

Some scenarios, like structured logging, want to be able to provide names for interpolation elements. For example, today a logging call might look like
`Log("{name} bought {itemCount} items", name, items.Count);`. The names inside the `{}` provide important structure information for loggers that help with ensuring output
is consistent and uniform. Some cases might be able to reuse the `:format` component of an interpolation hole for this, but many loggers already understand format specifiers

> and have existing behavior for output formatting based on this info. Is there some syntax we can use to enable putting these named specifiers in?

Reviewer 3: If such a syntax existed, how would the data be passed to TryFormatInterpolationHole?

Author: Presumably, there would need to be an overload that took it.

// This is converted to:
var receiverTemp = logger;
_ = TraceLoggerParamsBuilder.Create(baseLength: 47, formatHoleCount: 1, receiverTemp, out var builder) &&

>     builder.TryFormatInterpolationHole("Fred Silberberg") &&

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    builder.TryFormatInterpolationHole(name) &&
```

Looks like a typo from the previous iteration of the proposal

    * `T` is an _applicable\_interpolated\_string\_builder\_type_, and
    * `T` has an accessible static bool-returning method `Create` that takes 2 int parameters and 1 out parameter of type `T`, in that order.

We want to make `Create` a static method with an `out` parameter for 2 reasons:

1. By making it a `static` method instead of a constructor, we allow the implementation to pool builders if it so decides to. If we limited the pattern to constructors,
then the implementation would be required to always return new instances.
2. By making the builder an `out` parameter we allow the `Create` method to return a bool indicating whether to continue formatting, which is useful
for scenarios like the logger above that may want to skip any argument evaluation at all for cases when the log level isn't enabled.

**Open Question**

Should we swap the out parameter and return? IE, make the return the builder type, and have an optional bool out parameter for whether the builder was successfully created? This
might be easier for authoring and have better perf characteristics. While it does differ from the standard `TryX` pattern in C#, this method isn't intended for direct usage, so

> diverging may be fine.

Reviewer: The current form also means you need to spend more time specing out `ref struct` lifetime issues. I'm happy to sit down and work with you on this but I'd prefer to pick the form that doesn't require us to do this :smile:

1. A method argument is converted as part of determining applicable function members (covered below), or
2. Given an _interpolated\_string\_expression_ `S` being converted to type `T`, the following is true:
    * `T` is an _applicable\_interpolated\_string\_builder\_type_, and
    * One of the following is true:
        * `T` has an accessible static T-returning method `Create` that takes 2 int parameters and 1 out parameter of type `bool`, in that order.

>         * `T` has an accessible static T-returning method `Create` that takes 2 int parameters, in that order.

Reviewer 3: What about the other state that's passed in?  I know you have attributed arguments in open issues (even though I think it's really important), but your examples allow passing in the receiver, and that doesn't seem to be factored in here...?

Author: Neither of these is applicable there. Those are bullet one, covered in applicable function member.

Reviewer 3: I don't follow, but you think it's fine, so ok.

Author: Basically: these bullets don't allow for state to come in. The version that allows state to come in is covered in the applicable function member section.

> We want to make `Create` a static method because by making it a `static` method instead of a constructor, we allow the implementation to pool builders if it so decides to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By requiring `Create` to be a `static` method instead of a constructor, we allow the implementation to pool builders if it so decides to.
```

A function member is said to be an ***applicable function member*** with respect to an argument list `A` when all of the following are true:
*  Each argument in `A` corresponds to a parameter in the function member declaration as described in [Corresponding parameters](expressions.md#corresponding-parameters), and any parameter to which no argument corresponds is an optional parameter.
*  For each argument in `A`, the parameter passing mode of the argument (i.e., value, `ref`, or `out`) is identical to the parameter passing mode of the corresponding parameter, and

>    *  **for an interpolated string argument to a value parameter when `A` is an instance method or static extension method invoked in reduced from, the type of the corresponding parameter is an _applicable\_interpolated\_string\_builder\_type_ `Ai`, and one of the following overload resolutions succeeds. An interpolated string argument applicable in this way is said to be immediately converted to the corresponding parameter type with an _implicit\_string\_builder\_conversion_. Or,**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   *  **for an interpolated string argument to a value parameter when `A` is an instance method or static extension method invoked in reduced form, the type of the corresponding parameter is an _applicable\_interpolated\_string\_builder\_type_ `Ai`, and one of the following overload resolutions succeeds. An interpolated string argument applicable in this way is said to be immediately converted to the corresponding parameter type with an _implicit\_string\_builder\_conversion_. Or,**
```

>       * **Overload resolution on `Ai` with the identifier `Create` and a parameter list of 2 int parameters, the receiver type of `A`, and an out parameter of type `bool` succeeds with 1 invocable member, and the return type of that member is `Ai`, or**

Reviewer 2: Move these sub-bullets to `An interpolated string argument applicable in this way...`

Author: I specifically didn't do that because you can't have sub-bullets in the middle of a bullet.

*  Otherwise, the expanded form is applicable if for each argument in `A` the parameter passing mode of the argument is identical to the parameter passing mode of the corresponding parameter, and
   *  **for an interpolated string argument to a fixed value parameter or a value parameter created by the expansion when `A` is an instance method or static extension method invoked in reduced form, the type of the corresponding parameter is an _applicable\_interpolated\_string\_builder\_type_ `Ai`, and one of the following overload resolutions succeeds. An interpolated string argument applicable in this way is said to be immediately converted to the corresponding parameter type with an _implicit\_string\_builder\_conversion_. Or,**

>       * **Overload resolution on `Ai` with the identifier `Create` and a parameter list of 2 int parameters, the receiver type of `A`, and an out parameter of type `bool` succeeds with 1 invocable member, and the return type of that member is `Ai`, or**

Reviewer 2: Same comment as above

Author: Same answer as above.

        ArrayPool<char>.Shared.Return(_array);
        Return result;
    }

>     public bool TryFormatBaseString(string s) => TryFormatInterpolationHole((ReadOnlySpan<char>)s);

Reviewer 3: Nit: the cast is no longer needed

Author: Not if we have a generic. `TryFormatInterpolationHole<T>(T)` will be preferred over `TryFormatInterpolationHole(ReadOnlySpan<char>)`

Reviewer 3: That's ok.  It's just an optimization at that point.  The generic handed a string will work just fine.
